---
layout: post
category : webpack
tagline: "a bundler for javascript and friends"
tags : [tutorial, webpack, javascript]
---
{% include JB/setup %}
# webpack part I

## other solutions

For my part I was already familiar with grunt/gulp and had just heard about webpack as this thing more and more people started to use. First thing I heard about webpack was that it was configuration heavy and I thought didn't we just leave grunt for gulp because of it?

Having tried it out it feels pretty smooth. This post will cover the very basics of web pack which is installation, using it for command line, es6, source map and some production preparation. How you enjoy it..

The next part will cover more real world scenarios.

### server side tools
 asp .net rails, built bundling solutions

### task runners
A task runner usually has the job of concatenating a bunch of files to one or a few files and compress them in the process. Grunt does this for us. Gulp as well although gulp doesn't create tmp files in the process but operates on streams.

gulp,grunt

```
file.es6 => file.js
file.es6 => file.js
file.es6 => file.js file.js  browser
file.es6 => file.js file.js
file.es6 => file.js
file.es6 => file.js
```

## webpack

First thing you need to know with webpack is that it draws all its packages from the NPM, node package manager. It supports commonjs out of the box but you can make it support es2015 using babel. Webpack wants you to usea module system when you split up your project into many files so decide one of these three

- amd, 
- commonjs 
- ES2016 

### Install
You can install webpack both globally and locally depending on your needs.

```
npm install webpack -g
```

### CLI, Command line Usage
Assume we have

```
index.html
app.js
```

On entry point run 

```
webpack ./app.js bundle.js
```

Then ensure out index.html points out our bundle in script tag like this:

**index.html**

```
<script src="bundle.js"></script>
```


Pointing to our newly created bundle.js

### Usage with config file

Add a webpack.config.js

Lets do the same thing as we did on the command line. 

**webpack.config.js**

```
module.exports = {
	entry : "./app.js",
	output : {
		filename : "bundle.js"
	}
}
```

Running

	webpack

With no args produces the same result as before

#### Watch mode

	webpack --watch

Any changes will lead to bundle.js being rebuilt

OR we add 

	watch: true 

To config file

### Let' use a dev-server

	npm install webpack-dev-server -g

To run it just type:

	webpack-dev-server

#### hot deploy
It does have hot deploy mode where your changes happens automatically

There are different ways to accomplish this

1) run with the --hot flag

2) install HotModule plugin, and instruct config file to run it instead 


##### --hot flag

webpack-dev-server --hot

	webpack-dev-server --hot

Running it with this flag should lead to your bundle being rebuilt and browser to be reloaded. However to see this happen you will also give it the arguments:

	localhost:8080/webpack-dev-server/

You can run it with a--simple flag, and access your app like so

	localhost:8080/

##### hotmodule plugin

Change config file to this

**webpack.config.js**

```
var webpack = require("webpack");

module.exports = {
	entry : "./app.js",
	output : {
		path: path.resolve('build/js'),
		publicPath: "/public/js/",
		filename : "bundle.js",
		
	},
	watch: true,
	plugins: [
		new webpack.HotModuleReplacementPlugin()
	]
}
```

Adding this:

	var webpack = require("webpack");

And this:

	plugins: [
	        new webpack.HotModuleReplacementPlugin()
	]

To make hot deploy work we need to configure our output correctly.

	output : {
        path: path.resolve('build/js'),
        publicPath: "/public/js/",
        filename : "bundle.js",
        
    }

This means that running

	webpack

OR

	webpack-dev-server

will mean our bundle.js will be built to **path + filename** which is 

	/build/js/bundle.js

**BUT** to access it in the browser the script tag will need to point to our **publicPath**

So index.html script-tag will have to look like

	<script src="public/js/bundle.js"></script>

Try changing a js-file now and it work like a charm.. :)

### working with more than one file
As your app grows you want to split it up into more than one file. Coming from the nodejs world you are used to using require, which uses the commonjs module system. Assume we have the following files:

	// test.js
	var test = "I contain test";
	module.exports = test;	

	// app.js
	var test = require('./test');

	console.log('app loaded- ' + test);    

We are requiring **test.js** as a dependency. We run

	webpack  // rebuild bundle
	webpack-dev-server // run our program on :8080

And we see its working, we have a way to work with modules

### adding third party libs to our solution
What if we are in a place where we want to add files to our solution but we don't want to do require on it but should still be part of our app? We can add it by adding to our config file.

We change our config file to this:

	module.exports = {
	    entry : ['./thirdparty',"./app.js"],
	    output : {
	        path: path.resolve('build/js'),
	        publicPath: "/public/js/",
	        filename : "bundle.js",
	        
	    },
	    watch: true,
	    plugins: [
	        new webpack.HotModuleReplacementPlugin()
	    ]
	}	

 Changing entry row to:

	entry : ['./thirdparty',"./app.js"]

I.e we change it into an array and adds an extra file. The extra file is now added to the bundle even though we are not explicitly requiring it in code.

### loaders
Lets teach webpack how to do some new things like es2015. For that we will use babel. So we need the following

	babel-core
	babel-loader
	babel-preset-es2015

This will give us babel itself but also all es2015 features that babel knows about which is roughly 70% of the specifications.

So let't install these:

	npm install babel-core babel-loader babel-preset-es2015	--save-dev	

Also we need to add a .babelrc file specifying that we want to transpile from es2015

	//.babelrc
	
	{
		"presets" : "es2015"
	} 


#### write your es6 code and consuming it
	
	// test.es6
	class Test{
	    constructor() {
	        this.animal = "monkey"
	    }
	    
	    sayHi () {
	        console.log(`hellooo ${this.animal}`);
	    }
	}

	module.exports = Test; 

	// consuming it in app.js

	var  Test = require('./test')
	var t = new Test();
	t.sayHi();
	

	

#### adding webpack config

	module : {
        loaders : [
            {
                test : /\.es6$/,
                exclude: /node_modules/,
                loader : "babel-loader"
            }
        ]
    },
    resolve : {
        extensions : [ '','.js','.es6' ]
    }

The first part with *module::loaders* basically says

**test**, what to look for and process
 
**exclude** what not to process

**loader** what tool to run this

The second part *module::resolve* basically says what file endings to process when we do require. By adding es6 to this we don't need to write the full name 

	require('./file.es6')

it is enough to type

	require('./file')

It should be said, we could easily just change 

	loaders : [
            {
                test : /\.es6$/,

To

	loaders : [
            {
                test : /\.js$/,

Its more of a nice thing that we say which files are es6 and which are not.

#### running the code

	webpack-dev-server

#### another example with es6, using es6 import

	//test.js
	export class Test{
	    constructor() {
	        this.animal = "monkey"
	    }
	    
	    sayHi () {
	        console.log(`hello ${this.animal}`);
	    }
	} 
	
	export class Test2{
	    test2(){
	        console.log("test2");
	    }
	}

	//app.js

	import { Test, Test2 } from './test.js';

	let t = new Test();
	t.sayHi();
	
	let t2= new Test2();
	t2.test2();

When we have 2 exports or more we can use 

```
export { Test, Test2 }
```

When we have only one export like so:
	
 	//test.js
	export class Test{
	    constructor() {
	        this.animal = "monkey"
	    }
	    
	    sayHi () {
	        console.log(`hello ${this.animal}`);
	    }
	}

We need to add **default** keyword to export

	//test.js
	export default class Test{
	    constructor() {
	        this.animal = "monkey"
	    }
	    
	    sayHi () {
	        console.log(`hello ${this.animal}`);
	    }
	}

	// app.js	
	import Test from './test';

OR we do

	exports { Test }

### source maps
You can't really be expected to work with a bundle.js file while in dev mode so for that reason we need to add sourcemaps. Sourcemaps saves information of what files your project used to consist of before being bundled. So lets do that:

	webpack -d

OR

	weback-dev-server -d	

### going to production

	webpack -p

This minifies our bundle

Hope you had a good read. Stay tuned for part 2.

If you want to try out everything we did in the post have a look at this repo

[webpack-starting out](https://github.com/softchris/webpack-starting-out)